Step away from the buzz and bustle of Delhi’s crowded roads and neighbourhoods into the tranquil oasis of Humayun’s Tomb in the Nizamuddin East area. It is a UNESCO World Heritage site and one of the most splendid Mughal era monuments in the country. The majestic red-and-white mausoleum is the final resting place of Humayun, the second Mughal Emperor and father of Akbar. The monument is believed to be the inspiration for the Taj Mahal in Agra. This walk introduces you to fascinating aspects of Indo-Islamic architecture, Mughal history and heritage as you weave through the tomb complex. The walk then leads you through the narrow, clamorous streets of Nizamuddin Basti to another, very different tomb – the dargah of the famous Sufi saint Hazrat Nizamuddin Aulia. 

To take the tour make sure that you have purchased the tour from our app. We have easy in-app payment options integrated in our app for your convenience. 


Once you buy the tour and before we embark on it, here are some important tips – Do read the tour description and tour tips given below. Please remember to carry your ear phones and ensure that your mobile is well charged. It is best to be comfortably dressed for a walk but remember that you will need to cover your head and your legs at the Nizammudin Dargah. So don’t wear shorts or short skirts.  Remember to carry a bottle of water.

While taking the tour, be prepared to climb the steep stone steps of the main tomb building. The tour starts from entry to the Humayun’s Tomb complex. The nearest Metro stations are Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium and Jangpura on the Violet Line. You could take an auto from there, or from the Jor Bagh station on the Yellow Line, or a cab from any point in the city - to the parking lot of the Humayun’s Tomb complex. From there, a walking path leads to the ticket counter and entrance. The tomb complex is open to visitors from sunrise to sunset all days of the week.

If you are taking the tour online, it is best to start the audio tour once you are at Humayun’s Tomb and after buying your ticket and entering the compound through the gate on the left of the ticket office. For best experience, we recommend that you download the tour using the “Download Tour” button that appears on your screen just below the “Start” button while you still have access to Wifi.  The App will help you find directions to the starting point. If you are taking the tour offline, you can start it anytime. To start the tour press the START button inside the location pin that appears when you reach the starting point.  



Hello, namaskaar and as-salam alaykum. Welcome to our tour of Humayun’s Tomb and Nizamuddin Dargah. Are you on the wide paved path inside the Humayun’s Tomb complex immediately after purchasing your ticket? You will see grass lawns around you. Do wait here for a couple of minutes as I tell you the story of how it all started. 

You can’t see the tomb right now but it’s the centrepiece of this sprawling complex of gardens and other minor structures. Most date back to the 16th century. 

Humayun’s Tomb is one of the finest examples of Mughal architecture. It is an inspiration for all that came after it -- including the marble marvel, the Taj Mahal.

Humayun is often called the “unlucky emperor” and his tomb is known as “the majestic maqbara”. The second Mughal emperor was the son of Babur. Babur was a Central Asian chieftain and descendant of the great warrior Timur Lang who was the founder of the Timurid Empire in Persia. One of Babur’s forefathers, Chenghiz Khan, was founder of the Mongol Empire. After repeatedly losing Samarkand, Babur decided to target territories east of the Indus. Babur took advantage of the rivalries between the Afghan rulers of northern India and moved swiftly down the Himalayan mountain passes into Punjab before he faced any major resistance, according to historian Percival Spear. Ibrahim Lodi, the Sultan of Delhi, and his allies were defeated by Babur in 1526 in the Battle of Panipat.  Babur used cannons mounted on wheels, which were not seen in the region till then. The cannon fire threw Lodi’s huge army into disarray. Babur with 20,000 soldiers defeated Lodi’s army of 100,000 men and 1,000 elephants at Panipat. He marched on to capture Delhi and founded the Mughal dynasty which dominated the region for almost two centuries, historians such as Spear and Satish Chandra tell us. Their accounts are based on Babur’s memoirs Tuzuk-i-Babr or Babarnama, and contemporary accounts by a series of chroniclers during the reign of Humayun, Akbar and other Mughal rulers.

Humayun succeeded to the throne after his father’s death in 1530.  But he had to face revolts including by his own brothers. And he lacked his father’s military skills. In 1540, he was defeated by an Afghan warlord from Bihar, Sher Shah Suri. Sher Shah ruled over northern India from the Purana Qila in Delhi, not very far from where you stand. To your right is a walled enclosure around the tomb of Isa Khan Niyazi, a nobleman in Sher Shah’s court. Isa Khan’s tomb was built about 20 years before Humayun’s., as the Archaeological Survey of India informs us. 
 


Now step on to the broad stone-paved central path and start moving forward slowly with your back to the entry gate as I continue my story. Our first stop is the enclosure that has Bu Halima’s Garden and Tomb. You will soon reach a break in the wall of the enclosure. Follow the app for directions. Till we reach the enclosure let me tell you more about Emperor Humayun’s story.

After he was defeated in the Battle of Kannauj by Sher Shah, Humayun was a homeless wanderer for 15 years. He moved through Rajputana and Sindh, through Kandahar and then on to the Persian capital Kazvin. In Kazvin, he got a warm reception from his Safavid cousin, Shah Tahmasp I. Humayun gave the Shah a precious gift – a huge diamond and Shah Tahmasp gave him an army. But before that the Shah wined and dined Humayun and took him to the wondrous town of Tabriz. Finally, he gave him 12,000 soldiers to help him regain his throne. 

Humayun’s entourage included young Akbar who was born during the travels in exile. The time they spent in the Persian court had deep influence on the Mughals, especially on their court life, literature, art and architecture. Ethnically Chagatai Turks from Central Asia, the Mughals embraced the sophisticated Persian culture. They used the Persian language in their court. Humayun invited Persian soldiers, nobles, artists and administrators to settle in India. After years in exile, Humayun returned to India with this army and reclaimed his territories in 1555. But before a year could pass, the unlucky emperor died in an unfortunate accident. We will soon come back to the story of Humayun’s death.

You must have reached Bu Halima’s enclosure. Keep walking on the Central path.





As you walk on the central path towards the gate in front of you which is known as Bu Halima’s Gate look left and you will see a ruined tomb on the north corner of the garden. This is believed to be the grave of Bu Halima. We know very little about this mysterious woman. She seemed to have had an important place in the imperial harem as she was honoured with a tomb near the emperor’s.  

Who exactly was Bu Halima? One theory is that she may have been Humayun’s wet nurse. Another is that she was a Mughal noble woman. Her tombstone is unusually uncovered and lies open to the skies on top of a small rectangular structure. If you want a closer look, pause the audio and walk over to the tomb, but there are more exciting sights waiting ahead.

By now you must have reached our next stop which is officially known as Bu Halima’s Gate. Do cross the gate and stop at the gate for a few minutes.

 
The path toward Humayun’s tomb leads through Bu Halima’s Garden and Bu Halima’s Gate. The gate is a double-storeyed rectangular structure made of rubble and plastered masonry. Once you walk through it, turn around and look up at the imposing central arch. Wait here for a couple of minutes. On the upper area of the arch you would see brilliantly coloured glazed tiles. These have been partly restored to give a sense of the grandeur of the structure in its heyday. The entire complex would have been a glorious sight with its structures of red sandstone and white marble, the bright blue and ochre tile-work on gates and cupolas and intricate lattice-work on stones. All this is a seamless fusion of Indian and Islamic styles of art and architecture.

Once you exit through the Bu Halima Gate there is another gate on your right. This leads to the Arab ki Sarai and the Afsarwala Mosque. These parts of the complex may predate the garden tomb of emperor Humayun to the Lodi sultanate period just before the Mughals took over power. We will visit these parts on our return leg.

Delhi was the capital of several dynasties. Remains of their citadels are scattered across its landscape. The Mughals were known to be both warriors and aesthetes and builders of great cities, among them Lahore and Fatehpur Sikri. Humayun laid the foundations of a city in Delhi that he named Dinpanah or the Refuge of the Faithful. The city lay alongside the then gushing Yamuna River. The ruins of its inner citadel are today known as the Purana Qila or Old Fort. The river still flows but at a distance from Humayun’s Tomb. It is sluggish and polluted most of the year, except during the monsoons.
Now start moving again on the central path with Bu Halima’s Gate behind you. You will be walking towards another larger gate known as the West Gate. Here the central path is flanked by evergreen fig trees. Walk slowly as I now come back to the unfinished story of Humayun’s death. Do stop when you reach the West Gate.

There is an octagonal pavilion in the Purana Qila. It has steep, winding stairs. Humayun used this as his library. The story goes that he was going down these stairs when he heard the muezzin’s call to prayers and seated himself immediately on the steps. When he was getting up, his foot caught in his robes and he fell down the staircase. He was gravely injured. He breathed his last in a few weeks. Humayun was just 47 years old.

Legend has it his trusted courtiers feared that usurpers would get into action and try to snatch the throne from the 13-year-old Akbar. So they dressed a person as the king and made him walk up and down the palace ramparts so that from a distance it looked like the emperor was taking his daily walk.

Did the most famous Mughal emperor Akbar build the gigantic tomb for the father he lost at the young age of 13? Or was it built by Humayun’s senior-most wife, Haji Begum? Quite possibly, both were behind the grand mausoleum, maintains historian Catherine Asher. Records from the period show that senior women of the Mughal households played important roles in the court. These included Akbar’s step-mother Bega or Haji Begum, and mother Hamida Banu Begum. Contemporary historian and Akbar’s biographer Abu'l Fazl has said that Haji Begum was put in charge of the tomb upon her return from one of her pilgrimages. This implied Emperor Akbar was in control of the project.

You must have reached the West Gate by now.
 
Through this West Gate you get your first glimpse of the tomb and the Charbagh Gardens. The West Gate and the South Gate were the main entrances to the mausoleum and its gardens through a thick high wall made of rubble and mortar. The West Gate is about two storeys high. The upper floor has small courtyards. It has a red and buff sandstone facade embellished with marble ornamentation. Look at the six-pointed stars above the arches. The Mughals often used them as an ornamental cosmic symbol. Gateways are an important part of Persian and Islamic architecture. The tall imposing doorways, often with stairs leading to alcoves on a first floor, give a sense of the power that resides within. They also provide positions for guards to keep a watch on those entering the premises. Fatehpur Sikri near Agra, the royal city that Akbar built, has possibly one of the largest gates in Mughal architecture. It is  known as the Buland Darwaza - the Magnificent Gate.

At the centre of the West Gate is a large square hall with a domed ceiling and arches leading to chambers on either side. There is an ASI publications outlet selling excellent guidebooks on this monument and other protected structures. There is also an impressive exhibition in the chambers inside the gatehouse. It narrates the history of the complex and the huge efforts that have gone into its restoration. If you want you can pause the tour and take a look. Please resume the narration once you are back.


If you are now back in the hall, you can exit the West Gate from the side opening towards Humayun’s Tomb. 

Once you have crossed the West Gate, wait for a few minutes. Yyou will find benches on either side. If you want you can sit on these benches as I tell you more about the massive tomb in front of you.   


Soak in the view of the magnificent monument sitting in the centre of geometric gardens with a grid of paths. Haji Begum, or maybe it was Akbar - as we said the jury is out on that one, chose a Persian father-son team of architects to design Humayun’s last resting place. Legend goes that the two created a miniature model. It was shown to emperor Akbar who was impressed. So work on the monument began in 1562  under the supervision of Mirak Mirza Ghiyas and his son Sayyid Mohammed. It was completed in about a decade in 1571. The Persian architects had worked on grand buildings of Herat and Bukhara. They gave India its first Persian-style dome. 

The spectacular monument follows the radial and symmetrical plans of 15th century Timurid architecture in its garden setting. You can see the Persian architectural style in the huge bulbous marble outer dome. The dome sits on an eight-metre high cylindrical red sandstone drum with star shaped patterns of yellow sandstone. The structure has some purely Persian features such as the dome and glazed tile-work, but also draws heavily from the architectural traditions of the land on which it is built, according to S.A.A. Naqvi’s excellent account “Humayun’s Tomb and Adjacent Monuments”. The red sandstone with white marble inlays was a common feature of the architecture of the Delhi Sultanate that preceded the Mughals. The material was sourced locally. The marble came from Rajasthan and the red and buff sandstone from near Agra. Also from Rajasthan came several elements of traditional design. Take a look at the lotus bud fringed arches, the stone jali or lattice screens, the wide eaves or chhajjas and the dainty chhatris or cupolas on top of the structures. The monument is a splendid example of the synthesis of architectural styles.
 
The structure is built around a rubble core. It rests on a 6.5-metre tall and 99-metre wide plinth. It is made up of 56 cells containing more than 100 gravestones. The elongated drum and huge white marble-covered double dome towers 42.5 metres above the ground, topped by a golden finial. 
 


Now start moving towards the tomb while walking on the Central Path along the water channel. Use the app for directions. You will notice that the Central Path ends at a series of steps. This is the west staircase. Do pause at the entrance of the steps before you climb them. Use the app for directions.

While you walk to the monument listen to this soulful Sufi Music. This is sung by ________ and depicts _________

Music break - 60 Seconds 

Have you reached the steps? Do wait here for a minute or so while I explain why Humayun’s Tomb is called the dormitory of the Mughals by some historians.


The graves of many members of the Mughal royal family are located at the tomb. Among the graves are those of Humayun’s wives. The tombstones of the more important members lie in small chambers at diagonal points of the main octagonal chamber in which Humayun’s tomb is placed. But his actual grave lies in the chamber below that. Most of the arches you see on either side of you on the platform of the mausoleum lead to the real graves of the subsidiary tombs on the first floor. These are not open to visitors. The graves include those of several later rulers, though not of the three who succeeded Humayun. Humayun’s son Akbar had his own mausoleum, the simpler but beautiful Sikandra in Agra. Akbar’s son Jahangir was buried at Shahdara Bagh in Lahore. And Jahangir’s son Shahjahan was buried at the Taj Mahal, alongside his favourite wife, Mumtaz Mahal. This is the resting place of Humayun’s most loved wife, Haji Begum. Akbar’s mother, Hamida Banu Begum, was also buried here. The headless body of Dara Shikoh, the intellectual prince who was murdered by his throne-thirsty brother Aurangzeb, was buried here too. For more on Dara Shikoh, read former bureaucrat Gopal Gandhi’s ‘Dara Shukoh’. It is a fabulous work narrated in verse.
Now climb up the stairs. Do wait at what is called the West Front Terrace once you have climbed the steps. 

If it’s a winter day, enjoy the sun, otherwise move to the shade of the huge arches you will see in front of you.

Music – 20 Sec


When you are standing on the vast terrace paved with red sandstone, wait for a moment. Look at the beauty of the symmetrical gardens with the shady trees, the water channels and fountains. This will give you a feel of the highly developed aesthetic sense of Timur’s descendants. A highly cultured court life, patronage of arts and literature, landscaping of fabulous pleasure gardens, planning great cities with magnificent buildings such as Samarkand and Herat. These were a legacy the Mughals inherited.

The first Mughal emperor Babur was both a master of martial strategy and artistic skills. Babur was also a lover of books and gardens. He composed poetry and his memoir Baburnama is fascinating.

Babur’s son Humayun was an able warrior. But he was not as effective a commander as his father. Chroniclers of the time like Abu’l Fazl say Humayun would spend months celebrating a victory in battle with feasts replete with wine, opium and poetry, instead of focusing on consolidating the win. 

But like his father Babur, Humayun was scholarly with an interest in philosophy, theology and languages. He was a great believer in astrology. According to contemporary historian Abu’l Fazl, departments of Humayun’s administration were named after the elements. Earth looked after agriculture, Water after irrigation and Fire after military matters. It didn’t always match as perfectly because Air seemed to have all the leftover subjects under it. It covered everything else -- from the royal wardrobe and kitchen to the management of mules and camels. It seems Humayun was also very superstitious and always stepped into a room with his right foot to avoid bad luck.

There are also several references to a huge “carpet of mirth” which had astrological symbols and planetary positions marked on it. Courtiers and officers were given positions on it. They had to jump around places according to the cast of a dice by the emperor who sat on the spot marked as the sun.



If you are facing the Tomb, turn to your right and start walking keeping the façade of the main tomb chambers to your left and skirt around the tomb chambers till you reach the entrance to the cenotaph chamber. Follow the app for directions. The entrance is a big arched doorway on the south facade. Walk in through a domed chamber and a smaller second entrance with stone jaali work and you are in Humayun’s cenotaph.


Emperor Humayun’s sarcophagus of plain white marble stands on a slight platform. It is at the centre of the tall octagonal double-storeyed chamber. His actual grave, as we said, lies in the basement below. The tomb was not always as bare as it is today. An English merchant named William Finch visited the tomb in 1611. He has left an account that mentions rich carpets, a small shamiana or tent above the cenotaph which was covered by a pure white sheet and the presence of copies of the Koran, along with Humayun’s sword, turban and shoes.

Gentle light filters into the cool chamber from intricately patterned jaalis or latticed windows of stone. A mihrab which is a Mecca-facing prayer niche on the western wall indicates the direction to which worshippers should turn for prayers. 

Look up to the dome of the chamber and you will see how the architects gave attention to the smallest details in keeping with their Persian heritage. The walls are decorated with floral motifs and geometric patterns. 

The central chamber is connected to eight ancillary chambers in a Hasht-Bihisht floor pattern common to Persian architecture. The eight divisions are said to represent the eight levels of paradise for Muslims. 

It is believed Humayun’s wives Haji Begum and Hamida Banu are buried in the chamber to the northwest  along with Shah Jahan’s son Dara Shikoh. None of the tombs are inscribed.

Take your time to explore the tomb and the inner chambers. 

Once you have finished exploring the cenotaph chamber, come out on the South Terrace the same way you came in and you will be facing, at a distance, the South Gate.



The 52-foot high South Gate you see across as you exit the cenotaph chamber was the main entrance used by the royal family. They may have also entered by a smaller gate on the East Wall. If you turn slightly left towards the south-eastern corner at a distance you will see the Nai ka Gumbad or Barber’s Tomb hidden among trees. Further behind it is a large blue dome which is the Nila Gumbad. Let us now walk to the left to reach the corner of the terrace keeping the tomb to the left to get a better view of the two monuments. If you are keen to take a closer look, you can pause the narration and walk down the terrace and walk towards the two monuments. Do remember though that the Nila Gumbad is not in the complex and can’t be reached from here but there is a point along the Eastern Wall from where you get a closer view.  


Music – 45 Sec
The Nai-ka-Gumbad has a domed roof and graceful blue-tiled chhatris. There’s no airtight evidence, but according to folklore this tomb belonged to the favourite royal barber and hence its name. There are two marble graves inside - of a man and a woman - inscribed with verses from the Koran. 

A little further away in the same direction is the unmissable Nila Gumbad. As I mentioned, it lies outside the main walls of the tomb complex.  The Nila Gumbad was said to have been built for a faithful attendant by Abdul Rahim Khan-i-Khana. He was one of the nine most prominent ministers in the court of Humayun’s son Akbar. They were  known as the Navaratan, or the nine jewels. Abdul Rahim was the son of Bairam Khan, Humayun’s most faithful aide and commander of the Mughal army. Abdul Rahim was a military general but also an eminent poet and writer on astrology. Emperor Akbar entrusted him with translating his grandfather’s memoirs, the Baburnama, into Persian from the original Chaghatay Turkish.  Babur’s personal journal records events in his remarkable life from age 12 till his death in 1530. There are English translations and the book is certainly worth a read. Rahim built the Nila Gumbad for his faithful attendant Fahim Khan. 


Now walk leftwards along the low terrace stone jaali railing or parapet on the east terrace till you see a white flat-roofed building at a distance on your right. Stop when you see this building which is called the Baradari and turn towards it. Follow the app for directions. While you walk I will tell you why this area is a favourite final resting place for so many people.

There are hundreds of tombs and graves scattered around Humayun’s Tomb. Historians believe the main reason for this is the proximity to the home and dargah or grave-shrine of Shaikh Nizamuddin Aulia. He was one of the most influential Sufi saints of the region and a member of the Chishti order. Nizamuddin Aulia was born in Badaun in Uttar Pradesh in 1236 but lived in Delhi for most of his life. He died in 1325 at the age of 89 and counted among his disciples sultans Alauddin Khilji, Mohammad bin Tughlaq and the poet-musician Amir Khusro. The entire Nizamuddin area is dotted with tombs, big and small. These have been built over centuries as it is considered auspicious to be buried near Nizamuddin Aulia’s grave. Hidden from sight across the northern wall of the complex are the remains of a house believed to have been the original residence of Nizamuddin Aulia.

Stop when you see a white building at a distance to your right. This is called the Baradari. Turn towards it and stop for a while as I tell you about the building and how the River Yamuna used to flow right below it when Humayun’s Tomb was built.
If you look away from the Tomb, The pillared pavilion in front of you is the Baradari, which means twelve doors. Baradaris can be found in many forts, palaces, gardens and tombs of the Mughal era. They served as entertainment spaces for kings and nobles. They were designed to have exceptional acoustics, making them perfect venues for graceful dancing courtesans, soulful music performances and poetry recitals. 

The Baradari was created keeping in mind the hot Delhi summers. It was made to ensure respite from the heat with a constant cooling breeze wafting through from the River Yamuna which used to flow directly below it. The pavilion now faces a bleak view of railway tracks. The river’s course has shifted over time, and it can no longer be seen from the pavilion. Stones used to build Humayun’s Tomb were brought down the river. Now the railway track that runs parallel to the river carries goods and people. Years ago, emperors and nobles would gather at the pavilion, perhaps on the roof and enjoy cool evenings as they watched goods laden barges float by. 


Turn left and start walking again along the terrace parapet keeping the tomb to your left. You will soon pass the north-eastern corner and then you will be walking parallel to the Northern Wall. Watch out for a pavilion at the centre of the Northern Wall. We will stop in front of the Pavillion for a moment. While we walk, enjoy some music.

Music – 60 Seconds


Do you see a flat-roofed raised structure in front of you. This was often thought to be a hammam or bath house because of the presence of water. But it was most likely an elaborate irrigation system for the charbagh. A deep well behind the pavilion was the source of water that flowed through the patterned chute into the octagonal tank. The water then split into channels that spread across the entire gardens. 




At the Northern end of the tomb you will notice a hole in the terrace with stone jaali railings. This is the approach to the northern staircase. Walk down the staircase.

Music 20 secs




Have you reached the bottom of the Northern Staircase? Now start walking keeping the monument behind you and the Hammam building in front. At the first intersection on the path turn left till you reach another intersection with a few benches under shady trees. Follow the app for directions.  Once you reach there, sit on one of the benches for a few moments and look around while I tell you how the Mughals loved gardens and the efforts that went into creating them. 

60 seconds Music


Deep green lawns, palms, fig, mango and other trees dot the gardens surrounding the tomb and border the walls of the enclosure. In Farsi, the term for a walled garden is paradaeza. That is where the English word paradise is said to come from. Many tombs of Mughal emperors are set in walled gardens called charbagh or four-part garden - following the pattern of the Koranic paradise garden with its grids and terraces. In his memoirs, Babur makes repeated references to the Bagh-e-Vafa or the garden of fidelity in Kabul which he visited in between all the battles he fought. The Mughal capital at Agra also grew around planned gardens. So did the citadel in Delhi. Most of these gardens have disappeared over time. But the Humayun’s Tomb’s gardens are one of those that have been carefully revitalised by the ASI in collaboration with the Aga Khan Trust for Culture.

Sweet-smelling jasmine trees have been planted in some quadrangles, citrus and pomegranate trees in others. There are clusters of hibiscus in the intersections of quadrangles. Mango and neem trees border the walls. Paintings from the Mughal era indicate that the original gardens are unlikely to have had grass. That was probably a later British addition.

Paved walkways lined by water channels divide the 26-acre garden into four parts. Originally terracotta pipes provided water to the fountains at intersections of the waterways. Running water is the soul of these Persian-style gardens, giving life to the surrounding greens. The source of the waters was the River Yamuna. It flowed along the eastern wall of the complex feeding the wells that watered the gardens. The original gardens had flowers that bloomed at different times of the year and an abundance of fruit trees. The fruit would have been sold to help support the maintenance of the mausoleum, according to ASI archaeologist S.A.A. Naqvi. 

Now it’s time to go back to the West Gate.




Keeping the main tomb to your left walk straight towards the Western wall. When you reach the wall turn left and keep walking along the wall till you reach the West Gate. Keep an eye on the app for directions and walk slowly as I tell you how these gardens and the tomb have been restored.
Neither the tomb nor the gardens looked quite like this two decades ago. Years of neglect left the place decaying and thoughtless repairs made things worse. Parts of walls, gates and several structures collapsed over time. The vast gardens were either dusty or barren, though some old trees survived. Parts of the expanse were overgrown with weeds or had local people growing vegetables on it. The first serious and scientific efforts of restoration began around 1993, when the monument was declared a World Heritage Site. In 1997 the Aga Khan pledged to restore the gardens as a gift on the 50th anniversary of India’s independence. The restoration work on the gardens was undertaken after in-depth research by the AKTC – the Aga Khan Trust for Culture. The wells were restored and water channels were rebuilt. The fountains reconstructed. Hundreds of trees and shrubs were planted. 

In the next phase, the AKTC and the ASI took on the enormous and challenging task of restoring the tomb and other structures in the complex. Funding aid for this came from Tata Trusts. A million kilos of concrete were painstakingly removed from the terrace and roof by hand to restore original levels and slopes. Some 200,000 square feet of lime plaster were restored and 40,000 square feet of stone paving lifted and reset on the plinth. Wooden doors used as firewood in 1947 were restored, as we learn from a documentary film on the restoration by the Aga Khan Trust. 

Before the actual work started a team of multidisciplinary experts spent a year researching, documenting and assessing the condition of the structures. State of the art technology such as 3D laser scanning was used for the conservation effort. Masons rebuilt parts of the garden enclosure walls that had collapsed using materials, tools and techniques of Mughal-era builders. Plasterers, tile makers, stone carvers and carpenters worked together to restore the complex’s original splendour. In fact, the lost glazed-tile-making craft was rediscovered through scientific texts and collaboration with craftsmen from Uzbekistan. The youth of adjoining Nizamuddin Basti were trained to produce these tiles which were used to restore the bright roof canopies that you now see. 

Let us give you a sense of the scale of the work. Each stone on the main tomb’s facade was inspected for a repair strategy. Those beyond repair were replaced by stones as similar to the original as possible. Each stone on the 4,000-square-metre raised plinth weighed more than 2,000 kilos and at times needed more than a dozen men to reset them. The intricately patterned roofs and sparkling white walls you saw inside came up after the cement plaster was painstakingly removed. It was replaced with lime mortar which is cumbersome to make but endures for centuries. Over this came a final layer of lime plaster prepared with the addition of egg whites and marble dust. All in all, it is a commendable conservation effort that has made Humayun’s Tomb one of Delhi’s top attractions.

Oh, and don’t miss the shining gold-plated finial soaring into the sky from the dome. As restoration work inched towards completion, the original copper finial came crashing down in an aandhi or dust storm in 2014. The finial had 11 vessel-like parts built around a single wooden pole. Experts from the ASI decided rightly that it belonged to a museum environment. But what would they use to replace it? It took months to find the right material and artisans. But the finial with an exact brass replica of the inscription on top is up again and is expected to survive at least five centuries.

By now you must have reached the West Gate. Walk through it.


If you need to refill your water bottle, there’s a water cooler attached to a filter on the right as you exit the gate. Further right, you will find toilet facilities. On the left of the gate is an entrance that leads to the Afsarwala Mosque and Tomb and the Arab Sarai. We have to enter this gate for the next leg of our tour.


Please follow the app into the Afsarwala Enclosure. Once you have entered and taken a few steps, please stop for a while when you come to an intersection that has a path going to the right. You would find a bench on your left. You could also sit there while I tell you about Arab ki Sarai.

Music – 15 Sec
The Arab Ki Sarai is the monument that you see in front of you at the end of the long path that lies ahead. We will not be going there. But if you are interested, you could pause the tour and go have a look. It is quite fascinating. Once you have had a look, you can come back here and restart the narration.
 
Sarais were the rest houses, providing shelter to weary travellers and their animals along trade routes. But there is some confusion over the origin of the name Arab ki Sarai. Some say the sarai was built by Humayun’s first wife, Bega Begum, known as Haji Begum after she returned from her pilgrimage to Mecca in 1567 with 300 Arab clerics. It is believed to have served as the quarters of the clerics. Some historians however believe that the name Arab ki Sarai is misleading. They say that the structure was probably built to house Persian builders while they worked on Humayun’s Tomb. Yet another account suggests that the sarai existed long before the tomb complex came up, as a resting spot on the trade route between Agra and the Middle East. That accounts for the name Arab ki Sarai, contend experts such as S.A.A. Naqvi and Catherine Asher. 

A marketplace was a later addition to the complex and is believed to have been made by emperor Jahangir’s chief eunuch Mihr Banu. The Arab ki Serai is quite interesting and if you want to see it, as I said earlier, please pause the narration and go have a closer look following the signage. Otherwise follow the app and start walking. Turn onto the first path leading right. The path leads to the Afsarwala tomb and mosque.



Do take the path going right. To your right is a mosque and tomb which were built in the 1560s and named after an unknown “officer” and hence called Afsarwala Mosque. Once you have crossed the Mosque, you will soon see some old Peepul trees and on your right the northern gate to the Arab Sarai. This path to the northern gate is not a paved one but nevertheless walk towards it. Use the app to navigate.
 
Music -  30 secs


The northern gate to the Arab Sarai stands 12.2 metres high and had a dome on the roof that has now collapsed. It was built with local quartzite and has red sandstone and white marble inlay work. The massive original wooden doorway of the gateway still stands -- weathered by time and witness to the turning pages of history. One can imagine caravans of merchants with their mules and camels loaded with goods walking wearily through the gates and maybe selling their wares at the market within the enclosed walls. Go out of the gate. 
Once you move out of the Afsarwala Enclosure through the Northern Gate of the  Arab Sarai, you will see the stone-paved Central Path and Bu Halima’s Gate. Step on to the path, take a left and walk towards the exit of the complex towards the ticket counter. Just before the ticket counter at the end of a path to your left you will notice a series of steps. These steps will lead us to Isa Khan’s tomb, our next stop. 


After walking up the steps and down into the garden you will reach the enclosure housing Isa Khan’s Tomb. Walk around the tomb and take a peek inside while we tell you about this beautiful tomb.


The jewel green sunken garden is believed to be one of the first of its kind in India. At its centre sits the beautifully restored Isa Khan’s tomb with its white dome surrounded by striking bright blue minor cupolas. As you walk around it to the entrance that is at the back, look up. You will see traces of the ornamentation that’s still left of glazed tiles and chiselled stone patterns above the deep verandah. The verandah is supported by pillars that surround the octagonal tomb. The walls of the tomb have jaalis which are geometric patterned lattice screens carved out of stone. Jaalis are a speciality of Indian architecture. They filter the strong Indian sunlight and are placed in a way to also allow channels of breeze to cool the chambers. The cenotaphs inside the tomb are all believed to be of members of Isa Khan’s powerful family. Isa Khan Niazi was an Afghan nobleman in the court of Sher Shah Suri – remember? The Afghan lord from Sasaram in Bihar who defeated Humayun? Isa Khan was an influential person in the courts of both Sher Shah Suri and his son Islam Shah Suri. He is believed to have chosen the site of his tomb himself – near to the grave of Nizamuddin Aulia and planned it in detail before he died in his mid-90s. Don’t miss the beautiful blue-maroon decoration on the inner ceiling of the central dome of the tomb. 

Incidentally, an entire village had settled in the enclosure till the early 20th Century. Toward the right of the entrance, along the western wall of the enclosure, is a three-bay-wide mosque with striking mihrabs and blue-green tiled domes. Behind it and all along the border of the enclosure runs a rampart-like wall. It is not very high and has stairs leading up to it at regular intervals. If you’re feeling adventurous take a walk along the rampart but be careful of the gaps that lead to stairs.

Once you have had a closer look at the tomb, exit the enclosure and the Humayun Tomb compound from the very gate that you came in from.




After exiting the Humayun Tomb compound, walk straight through the private car parking area till you reach a traffic circle in which stands yet another tomb -- with a conspicuous blue dome. It is called Sabz Burj or green dome, even though the dome is blue. Follow the app for directions.

Now it is time for us to move on to Nizamuddin Basti and the Dargah of Hazrat Nizamuddin. This is where you will also find the Dargah of Aulia’s favourite disciple, the poet-musician Amir Khursro. The tomb of the greatest Urdu poet of all time, Mirza Ghalib, is also there. 

Do stop when you reach the main road and can see the Sabz Burj Traffic Island.

While you reach the crossing, listen to this Qawali by __________. The lyrics are by Mirza Ghalib/Amir Khusro

Music - 60 Seconds 



The blue-domed mausoleum at the centre of the traffic island in front of you is a relic from the Mughal era with a rather varied past. Very little of the original green, yellow and blue tile work is still visible and the dome is now mostly blue. It is often called Neela Chhatri and confused with the Neela Gumbad situated behind Humayun’s Tomb. Some historians feel it was built in the early-16th century. Now turn left on Mathura Road and walk on till you reach a pedestrian underpass to cross the road. It should take about 2 minutes. While you walk I will tell you about the Sufi Saint, Hazrat Nizamuddin Aulia. Follow the app for directions. Do stop when you reach the mouth of the underpass.
The settlement of Nizamuddin Basti is named after the Sufi saint, Hazrat Nizamuddin Aulia, and grew around the saint’s dargah. It represents seven centuries of a living heritage associated with devotion, music, food and rituals that has been able to withstand the test of time. 

Hazrat Nizamuddin, who lived from 1238 to 1325, was a Sufi saint of the Chishti order who believed that to truly love god, one must love all of god’s people. His teacher, Hazrat Baba Fareed, told him after he chose him as his successor: "Be like a big tree so that Allah's creation, the human beings in their vast multitudes, may find rest and solace under your shadow.” Aulia had a legion of disciples but did not have a clear successor. Many of his disciples and their followers went on to spread the ideals of Sufism across the subcontinent.

There are many legends about Aulia and his powers. It is said that he greatly influenced Delhi’s Muslim kingdoms starting from the Delhi sultanate during the 13th century up to the Mughals. Legend has it that King Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq returning to Delhi wanted the saint to be removed from there. Aulia’s disciples urged him to leave before the king arrived.  But the saint merely said: “Dilli Durast (or Delhi is still far away).” Ghiyasuddin died before he reached Delhi when celebrations to mark a battle victory were taking place and a structure fell on him. Historians cite Moroccan traveller and chronicler Ibn Batuta as saying that a conspiracy by the ministers of his court and one of his sons was behind his death. 

By now you must have reached the pedestrian underpass to cross the busy Mathura Road.
 


Have you reached the pedestrian underpass for crossing Mathura Road? When you climb down the steps make sure there are others doing so as well, it is safest to be in company in Delhi’s pedestrian subways. There’s always a bit of filth around in these subways, but it is the safest way to cross the Mathura Road. After you cross by the underpass take the staircase up on your right and you would come out near the Markaz Gali entrance to Nizamuddin Basti. Our app will help you with directions. Once at the entrance of Markaz Gali step in, move to a side, and soak in the atmosphere. Ignore all the stallkeepers who will be loudly urging you to buy flowers for the dargah or leave your shoes at their stall. You do not need to buy any offerings unless you want to. And the shoes can be kept much nearer the dargah. For now let me prepare you for what to expect inside.

Music - 15 Seconds


The Hazrat Nizamuddin Basti is truly a multi-sensorial, colourful experience. On your way to the main dargah complex you may be enveloped by the soothing sounds of Sufi music and the heady aroma of spices and perfumes as well as varieties of street food. 

The narrow gullies are full of stalls stacked with a variety of quaint trinkets and curios. Many of the stalls sell clothes, shoes and accessories while others offer panels and pieces of cloth inscribed with verses from the Koran in beautiful calligraphy. The streets of the Basti are famous for the variety of attars or scented oils that are sold in little bottles. Do you like the fragrance of jasmine? Or is it the scent of a rose in bloom that appeals to you? These scents are all available in the tiny stalls. If you are lucky, you may even get a bottle that captures the smell of rain-splattered earth.

Jostling with the attar are different kinds of aroma. These are the smoky smells of meat being grilled, of baked breads and saffron-tinged biryani. The neighbourhood is famous for its eateries. If you like your kababs, you can have some flat shammi, or the fine mince seekh on a skewer. You can sit at one of the restaurants and have a plate of biryani or perhaps some nihari, a nourishing meat dish. Paneer and vegetable dishes are there for vegetarians.  There are various little street food stalls here – and medium and large eating places. Now let us head to the tomb of the famous poet Mirza Ghalib.


We will now walk slowly down the clamorous street to the tomb of the famous 19th century poet Mirza Ghalib and the beautiful marble structure known as the Chaunsath Khamba. It will fall on our left on the route to the main dargah enclosure. Follow the app for directions.

Music - 60 Seconds


Can you see a large and ancient gate on your left? It is next to a big building that houses the Ghalib Academy. The gate leads to the Chaunsath Khamba tomb, along with the understated marble grave of Urdu poet Mirza Ghalib and an Urs Mahal. Enter the complex through the gate.

On entering the clearing beyond the gate, you will find to your left the Urs Mahal, a heritage structure built to serve as a congregational space, especially for Urs or death anniversaries of the Sufi saints. The death of Sufi saints is regarded as their union with god and their Urs is celebrated like a wedding, with joy and positivity. 




Now look to your right. You will notice a large marble structure that can be accessed after climbing a a few steps. This is the Chausath Khamba. Do climb up to the structure 
The Chaunsath Khamba is a beautiful marble structure with a flat roof supported by pillars. The single pillars inside and double ones outside apparently add up to 64 but don’t waste your time trying to count them. Enjoy instead the beauty of this quiet mausoleum as intricate screens filter the incoming light into soft patterns on the marble interiors. The structure and its surroundings are said to contain the tombs of Mirza Azizah Koka, a nobleman and commander during Emperor Jahangir’s reign, and various members of his family including his many wives. Mirza Koka was the son of Atgah Khan, prime minister to Akbar. The monument was said to have influenced many great buildings including the Diwan-i-Khas in emperor Shah Jahan’s Red Fort.


After you have had a look at the structure, you will need to exit the Chausath Khamba structure towards the right from where you entered it and walk up  to the tomb of the famous poet Mirza Ghalib. The tomb is just to the right of the Chausath Khamba and has a separate enclosure.


Have you spotted the tomb of Mirza Ghalib?

Mirza Ghalib could be called the last poet of the Mughal era and he was witness to the downfall of the empire. Considered one of the most influential of Urdu poets, Ghalib’s poetry is extremely popular to this day in India and Pakistan. Some rank him with Rumi as one of the greatest Sufi poet philosophers. Take a stroll around the enclosure and tomb of Ghalib, pay your respects and listen to a couplet from one of his evergreen creations:

Hazaaron khwahishen aisi ki har khwahish pe dam nikle
Bahut niklay mere armaan, lekin phir bhi kam nikle

Thousands of such desires that over each longing the breath would leave.
Many were my desires, but still they were but few. 


Exit from Ghalib’s tomb enclosure and find a nice quiet corner in the Chaunsath Khamba-Urs Mahaal complex – there is a platform under a tree and some steps -- where you can spend a few minutes while I tell you about what you would see in the Nizamuddin Dargah Complex where we will be heading next. The dargah is very noisy, specially in the evenings, as the saint’s followers come to pay homage from all corners of India and the world and it would be difficult for you to listen in. I will now tell you what to look out for inside and when I finish you can switch off the audio and enjoy the unique experience.



When inside the dargah, the first stop will be the grave of Nizamuddin Aulia’s student, the famous poet Amir Khusro. It is said that Nizamuddin Aulia had wished that anyone who wanted to visit his grave would first have to pay obeisance to his student. 

Amir Khusro, called Tuti-e-Hind or the "parrot of India", is the poet who introduced ghazals and is often referred to as the creator of Qawwali, a devotional form of music still immensely popular in the subcontinent. Many also believe that he introduced the tarana – a form of raga-based singing with syllables but not words -- and the khayal, an intrinsic part of Hindustani classical music. It is also said that he invented various kinds of instruments including the sitar and tabla. 

Khusro was the court poet for kings during the reign of the Delhi sultanate. He was Aulia’s favourite disciple. The saint was so attached to the poet that he had once said if the Sharia, or Islamic law, had allowed him to do so, he would have had Khusro buried beside him within the same grave, according to accounts by contemporary chroniclers like Ab’l Fazl. 

Khusro’s tomb is the first structure you will see on entering the dargah complex. Women are not allowed in the inner area.

After seeing Khusro’s tomb, walk down the stairs and in front at the centre of an open courtyard is the tomb of Nizamuddin Aulia. His original tomb does not exist anymore. The present dargah was created in 1563, long after Aulia’s death, by a nobleman called Faridun Khan. The dargah is a beautiful building of white and gold, embellished with multi-coloured floral and patterned motifs, and inscriptions of lines from the Koran. Within an outer layer of ornamented pillars and arches are intricately carved marble jaalis or perforated screens. You can’t miss the hundreds of red sacred threads tied into these carved screens. It is believed that if you tie a thread here and make a wish, the saint will make the wish come true.

Remember to cover your head while entering the dargah. Women aren’t allowed in but can peer in through the jaalis. Inside, the saint’s shrine is covered in a scented green cloth with writings from the Koran inscribed on it. Devotees touch the feet end of the shrine as they offer their prayers and then walk around it, showering flower petals and food grains, sprinkling attar from small bottles and lighting incense sticks. Often in the evenings, animated performers sing Sufi-style devotional music known as Qawwalis, seated around the dargah. 

In the shadow of the dargahs of the great Sufi saint and the poet-musician lie several neglected tombs of other eminent people, kings and queens. Most people walk by these tombs, without realising that they are going past a slice of history. The intricately carved marble structures lining the way are the tombs of several important people including Jahanara, Muhammad Shah Rangila and Mirza Jahangir who was the son of Akbar II.

The larger one among the marble structures which you would pass on your way from Khusro’s tomb to that of Auliya, is the tomb complex of Muhammad Shah, the 12th Mughal emperor. Shah was not much of an administrator and is often blamed for the decline of the Mughal Empire. Despite his failures in warfare, he was a great patron of the fine arts, music and poetry. He was also known by his pen-name, Sada Rangila, meaning always colourful, leading to the nickname Muhammad Shah Rangila. 

Hidden behind the grave of Muhammad Shah Rangila, is a similar but smaller structure. This is the tomb complex of the princess Jahanara, the eldest daughter of Mughal emperor Shahjahan. She was a disciple of a Sufi saint of the Qadiriyya order. She even wrote a highly acclaimed biography of Moinuddin Chisti, the first saint of the Chishti order who is said to have brought Sufism to India. 

On her grave are inscribed these words:

Let nothing but green grass cover my tomb.
For it is the best grave cloth of poor in spirit
The humble and mortal Jahanara Begum

The  red sandstone façade of the Khana Masjid looms over the daragh complex. It also known as the Khilji Mosque. It was built by Khizr sultan, a follower of Nizamuddin Aulia. This structure was built much before the dargah of the sufi saint was erected. The mosque has been in use ever since its construction for almost 700 years till now. So these are the sights and sounds you can expect inside the dargah and, of course, the blessings of Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya.



Before you turn off your app, I will tell you the route you should now take. Exit from the Chaunsath Khamba Gate and turn left. Just follow the stream of people. If you are confused at any point ask for the way to the dargah. You will have to leave your shoes at one of the stalls selling religious knickknacks near the Dargah Entrance. Once you finish your tour inside, come out and collect your shoes, and please pay the shopkeeper a small token amount, maybe Rs 20. After collecting your shoes, if you are feeling adventurous, do try out one of the food outlets. Dry kebabs and a hot roti are always the safest things to have. Now I will bid you goodbye. I hope you have enjoyed this walk.

Music – 2 Minutes



